# Data Availability
In general, when thinking about the energy / performance cost of any distributed system that uses replicated state machines (= blockchains) with deterministic compute runtime (= smart contracts) for deciding on valid append operations to the state machine's state (= proposed block), there are these considerations:

**Consensus:** The state of the blockchain is verified and secured by ordering data and preventing double-spend in a process called consensus. Typical consensus mechanisms include Proof-of-Stake (PoS), Proof-of-Work (PoW), or Proof-of-History (PoH) in Solana’s case. Consensus provides security as it ensures that all added transactions are valid.

**Data Availability:** Blockchains work to ensure that the data that was verified on the Layer-1 (L1) and appended to the chain is now available and transparent for the entire node network to view (not the same as a storage layer). On the modular side, examples are Polygon Avail and Celestia, which are building out separate data availability and consensus layers, while depending on other chains for settlement and execution.

**Execution:** The execution layer acts upon smart contracts as transactions occur in order to update the state of the chain. Computation alters the state of the blockchain and is cued from smart contracts or signed transactions. Rollups are Layer-2 (L2) chains and inherit features from the L1 that it posts to. They perform execution, while consensus and data availability are outsourced to other networks. Within this, there are several flavors of rollups, but Optimistic and ZK-rollups are often the most popular and they are classified by how they validate transactions and store data back to the parent chain.